---
title: Ceramic Pillow and Zun Wine Vessel - A Formal Analysis
author: Ian Y.E. Pan
date: 2021-06-25 11:18:00 +0800
categories: [My Essays and Other Writings]
tags: [essay]
---

> By Ian Y.E. Pan, 2021
>
> This writing is adapted from an essay I wrote for a university
> course on artistic traditions in China.

## Ting Ware White Ceramic Pillow in The Shape of a Child

Ting Ware White Ceramic Pillow in The Shape of a Child (see Figure I),
standing 18.8 centimeters tall with a base diameter of 31 by 13.2
centimeters, is currently located in the National Palace Museum in
Taipei. The ceramic pillow, dated back to the Northern Sung period
(960-1126), is yet to be identified with a known sculptor. This art
piece, as speculated by historians, may have been of general use such
as sleeping, instead of being made to accompany the deceased in the
tomb
([Reference](https://theme.npm.edu.tw/selection/Article.aspx?sNo=04001028&lang=2#inline_content_intro)). The
child, cross-legged and casually posed, emits a life-like and pleasant
emotional state towards the observer.


![Ceramic Pillow in The Shape of a Child](/images/ceramic-pillow.jpg){: width="60%"}
_Fig. 1: Ceramic Pillow in The Shape of a Child_

The sculpture is in phenomenal condition, despite the yellowing around
the feet and head of the child. The otherwise even color scheme
produces a consistent minimalist atmosphere, as if the sculptor were
not trying to impress his audience with the use of vibrant colors, but
rather turning the focus to the delicate craftsmanship of refined
carving skills.

The ceramic pillow is semi-symmetrical, crafted along a horizontal
axis running from the crown of the child's head on the left, to its
crossed feet on the right. Lying on the mattress with its stomach, the
child’s arched back conveniently serves as a curve to rest the head
for the owner of the ceramic pillow. The angle at which the child’s
head is raised is offset by the presence of his buttocks and crossed
feet on the right, jointly forming a basin-shaped form, with the
lowest height in the middle, and the crowning height peaking on the
two sides of the artifact.

The subject, a child lying with its stomach on a piece of mattress,
bears an expression of content when viewed from a horizontal level. If
viewed from a more top-inclined angle, the sculpture shows slight
upward curves on both side of the child’s closed lips, appearing to be
in a peaceful mood. Its likewise calm angles of eyebrows, cast only a
superficial downward shadow where it meets the child’s eye lids. When
inspected from a larger distance, the eyebrows are almost
imperceptible, mainly since the entire artifact is of a similar
off-white ivory ceramic color tone. The head of the subject is a
slightly exaggerated heart shape, with pronounced top left and right
corners and a relatively flatter top. The hairline is unusually
receding for a young child, and one could hardly notice any hair
wherever besides on both sides of its head, yielding a large portion
of baldness from the forehead to the back of its head. The forehead of
the subject is prominently outstanding, perhaps implying that the
child is intelligent. Moreover, one observes that the earlobes are
both long and thick: two traits that are especially appreciated by the
ancient Chinese, with the former representing the longevity of life,
and the latter denote an abundance of wealth (Asai et al, 1996).

The child has its left arm placed beneath its right chin to partially
support the weight of its head and maintain the static posture. The
slightly tilted head allows its neatly combed hair starting from its
right temple to lightly touch the back of its left hand. The hair on
both sides of its head, straight and fine, are combed backwards and
downwards, appeared to have been used with a fine-tooth comb and
perhaps moist or a wax-like medium. The conspicuous forehead,
over-sized earlobes, calm expression, along with the atypically fine
neat hair, together suggest that the child is of a well-educated and
financially comfortable household.

Upon closer inspection, one can observe the intricate details and the
physical accuracy that the artist applied to depicting the flesh of
the child’s cheeks and chin. With the angle at which the head is
tilted, the delicately minute wrinkles starting from both corners of
its mouth are asymmetrical, for the gravitational force, unapparent as
it may be, draws the muscles towards the bottom right chin. Similarly,
the creases and folds of the child's clothes follow a coherently
natural style, denting around the stretching motions of the
figure. Our subject wears a grandly detailed vest of brocade, a class
of richly decorative shuttle-woven fabrics (Shayestehfar, 2015). The
vest features floral patterns on the back, incorporated with shapes of
leaves and stems in the form of an ivy. The side and front are
decorated with a silver-coin-like pattern. From a different
perspective, the silver-coin patterns may also be interpreted as jade
beads threaded with thin sharp leaves arranged in four, positioned in
a sun ray alignment.

With its left arm placed under the chin, the right arm is positioned
below the chest and folded under the left arm. Underneath the child's
left armpit, one notices that its right hand is holding on to a
ribbon, which is connected to a sphere-shaped object. At first glance,
one may reckon it is part of the decoration of the mattress the child
is laid upon, but the sphere-shaped object is neither placed in the
center of the mattress, nor is it a repeatable decorative pattern
around the rim of the fabric case. Although the use of the object in
the child’s right hand is unclear, one may reasonably believe it is a
toy, perhaps with a ringing bell within the sphere. With the intricate
details of the brocade patterns on the clothing, the existence of a
hand-crafted toy, and an abundance of embroidery on all sides of the
mattress, the artist again suggests that the household is not only
well-mannered, but also wealthy to a certain extent, echoing the
child's fine-combed hair among other physical features.

## Zun Wine Vessel in The Shape of an Animal

Zun Wine Vessel in The Shape of An Animal (see Figure 2), standing at
29.0 centimeters tall, has a length of 39.5 centimeters and a width of
14.5 centimeters. Similar to the child-shaped ceramic pillow
introduced in the previous section, this bronze artifact is currently
located in the National Palace Museum in Taipei, and its anonymous
creator is also yet to be identified. The zun wine vessel is dated
back to the Mid Warring State Period in ancient China, circa 4th to
3rd centuries BCE. This artifact signifies a cultural "peak in the art
of bronze casting in China"
([Reference](https://artsandculture.google.com/asset/zun-vase-in-the-shape-of-an-animal/EgFJE35m6kGy1g)),
extending back to the Shang and Zhou dynasties. The vessel is of the
shape of a "realistically depicted, sturdily standing four-legged
hoofed animal"
([Reference](https://theme.npm.edu.tw/3d/Content.aspx?sno=04001143&lang=2&fromCnt=0)). Its
geometrically round eyes, long and pointy ears, plump belly, and short
yet steady legs together serve both utility and decorative
purposes. The lidded opening on the animal’s back is emplaced to allow
wine, or any other liquid form, to be refilled. Its O-shaped mouth
serves as the nozzle of the vessel, enabling a fine projection of the
pouring of wine.


![Zun Wine Vessel in The Shape of an Animal](/images/zun-wine-vessel.jpg){: width="60%"}
_Fig. 2: Zun Wine Vessel in The Shape of an Animal_

Overall, the bronze artifact is in excellent condition, despite having
slightly mottled paint in various locations. The surface of the vessel
is coated with a uniform dark color, composing of black with tints of
dark gold and green. On the body of the animal, one can observe barely
perceptible patterns of clouds and geometric shapes. The inscribed
patterns are also inlaid with gold and silver material.

The specific species of the subject is unknown. At first glance, the
animal seems to be a simultaneous mixture of many creatures. Judging
from the proportion of its legs, head, and body, the original animal
size is likely to be depicted closer to that of a dog. However, upon
closer inspection on the design of the animal's head, one recognizes
traits of an ox, especially with the wide curves around the nostrils,
as well as the big round eyes. In addition, the animal's ears bear a
form indistinguishable from that of a rabbit, and a tail similar to
that from a horse. Finally, the plump belly and short steady legs
reminds the spectators of traits one would expect from a
hippopotamus. Overall, the animal appears to be non-hostile and
possibly herbivorous. The latter conclusion was drawn due to the many
herbivorous animal traits one could find on the design of the zun
vessel, including horse, ox, hippo, and rabbit. With the shape of the
artifact, the artist was likely trying to convey a warm, friendly, and
lovable atmosphere of the subject, reinforcing a pleasant feeling
towards its owner while he pours divine wine out of the vessel's body.

There are two main focal points of the zun vessel. The first one takes
the form of a collar around the animal's neck. The collar is plain and
uniformly golden. When compared to other gold-painted components (for
instance, the opening lid on its back, which will be discussed in
later paragraphs), the golden collar suffers from the least amount of
mottling. This suggests that the creator of the artifact paid extra
attention when applying the molten gold around the animal's neck,
resulting in a consistent golden spread that has hardly varied through
the thousands of years of preservation. Echoing the conclusion of the
previous paragraph, the presence of the collar also implicitly implies
that the subject is domestically tamed animal, instead of a native
beast.

On the forehead of the animal, one observes studs of a brighter
cyan. Similar colors can also be found near the eyebrows area and the
extended cheek bones below and behind its golden eyes. The nostrils
bear an unnatural inward curve, imitating the shape of clouds and
resonating in concert with the patterns on its back, once again
suggesting that the creature is make-believe, despite the realistic
craftsmanship and depiction.

On the back of the creature is where the open lid, the second focal
point of the bronze artifact, is located. The diameter is large enough
for wine to be easily poured into the body of the animal for
storage. There are golden engravings and silver inlays on the surface
of the lid, with patterns forming a circular shape as decoration. Upon
closer inspection, the pattern come together to form a shape
resembling a dragon. Due to the age and perhaps the previously
suboptimal preservation method of this artifact, around one-third of
the decorative golden pattern on the lid is faded, revealing the
brownish green of the bronze underneath. The faded golden pattern thus
results in a look resembling a scorpion, instead of the original
intention as a dragon.

## Conclusion: A Comparison between Ting Ware White Ceramic Pillow in The Shape of a Child and Zun Wine Vessel in The Shape of an Animal

The two artifacts presented in this essay, at first glance, may have
little in common after all, they are made of different materials and
the ceramic pillow is a much more modern work, in comparison with the
bronze zun wine vessel. However, one can observe that the level of
intricacy of the craftsmanship and the attention to detail especially
revolving the patterns, is to some extent on par with one another. For
instance, one can clearly notice the resemblance between the mattress
rim of the Ting ware white ceramic pillow and the golden engravings on
the opening lid of the zun wine vessel animal. In addition, both
artifacts are of similar dimensions and created as utility tools, with
the former serving the purpose of being used as a pillow to sleep
upon, and the latter used as a wine container for social gatherings or
royal events. Both the ceramic pillow and the bronze animal are mainly
bearing one plain color throughout their surfaces, with exceptions
found in minor details. In terms of the overall geometry of the
artifacts, they are both vertically symmetrical with an arch in the
middle and the ends supporting an increase in height. Finally, with
the frequent use of smooth curves, both the ceramic pillow and the zun
wine vessel give off a welcoming, pleasant, and almost adorable
character.

## Bibliography

**Museum Introduction of Ting Ware White Ceramic Pillow in The Shape of
a Child.** Retrieved from:
https://theme.npm.edu.tw/selection/Article.aspx?sNo=04001028&lang=2#inline_content_intro

**Shayestehfar, Mahnaz. "A Comparative Study of Brocade Weaving Art
Motifs and Designs in Iran and Malaysia."** In Islamic perspectives
relating to business, arts, culture and communication,
pp. 59-68. Springer, Singapore, 2015.

**Asai, Yasuhiro, Manabu Yoshimura, Naoki Nago, and Takashi Yamada. "Why
do old men have big ears? Correlation of ear length with age in
Japan."** BMJ: British Medical Journal 312, no. 7030 (1996): 582.

**Museum Introduction of Zun Wine Vessel in The Shape of an
Animal.** Retrieved from:
https://artsandculture.google.com/asset/zun-vase-in-the-shape-of-an-animal/EgFJE35m6kGy1g

**Museum Introduction of Zun Wine Vessel in The Shape of an Animal, 3D
Modeled.** Retrieved from:
https://theme.npm.edu.tw/3d/Content.aspx?sno=04001143&lang=2&fromCnt=0
